Some Vials Of COVID-19 Vaccine Contain Extra Doses, Expanding Supply, FDA Says The Food and Drug Administration says that some of the vials of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine being distributed throughout the U.S. contain extra doses and the agency is encouraging hospitals and clinics to use the additional shots to speed up the nationwide immunization campaign. The agency issued the guidance Wednesday after health care workers reported throwing out the excess vaccine, fearing it would be against the rules to use it. "At this time, given the public health emergency, FDA is advising that it is acceptable to use every full dose obtainable (the sixth, or possibly even a seventh) from each vial, pending resolution of the issue," the FDA wrote in a tweet. The FDA is aware that some vials of the Pfizer-BioNTech #COVID19 Vaccine have contained extra product after five doses are obtained. The agency is working with Pfizer to determine the best path forward, and will share additional updates as we have them. At this time, given the public health emergency, FDA is advising that it is acceptable to use every full dose obtainable (the sixth, or possibly even a seventh) from each vial, pending resolution of the issue. As health care workers prepared for the vaccine's arrival, they expected to receive vials holding five doses. That left many surprised by the overfilled containers. Inoculations began in the U.S. on Monday with health care workers and the elderly being the first in line to get it. For the medicine to be fully effective, each patient requires two injections three weeks apart. Leading health experts say that even if all goes well, the vaccine will not be available to the general public until the end of March or beginning of April. The Pfizer-BioNTech-developed drug is the only vaccine that has been authorized for emergency use by the FDA. Permission to use the additional portions means the limited supply could increase by up to 40%, Politico reported. A vaccine developed by Moderna is expected to get emergency use authorization from the FDA as early as this week. Clinical data shows it is nearly as effective as the Pfizer injections. Drugmakers typically overfill vaccine vials, anticipating spills and other waste, Politico explained. "It's pretty unusual to have a full extra dose or more though — but it does seem to be there!" Erin Fox, a pharmacist at University of Utah who monitors drug shortages, told the news outlet. However, because there are no preservatives in the vaccines, partial doses from separate vials shouldn't be combined. The agency is working with Pfizer to learn more about the issue and provide updates. There are conflicting reports about when the U.S. is poised to receive another batch of the medicine from Pfizer. As NPR reported, "Although a Pfizer board member says the government declined to buy more doses beyond the initial 100 million agreed upon in July, Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar told PBS Newshour that this is inaccurate." Meanwhile, The New York Times reported that a second allotment of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine may not be available to the U.S. until next June, given the combination of short supply and global demand. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation's senior official for infectious diseases, told NPR this week that half of all Americans would need to be vaccinated before seeing an impact on the spread of the virus, and that 75% to 85% of the population would need to be vaccinated to create herd immunity. He predicted the U.S. could begin to see early stages of herd immunity by late spring or summer. Houston voter fraud vigilante suspect has Covid-19, his lawyer says. Dallas (CNN)A former Houston police captain charged with running a man off the road and pointing a gun at his head over a voter fraud conspiracy theory did not appear in court Thursday. Mark Aguirre, 63, was expected to make his first court appearance in Harris County. Instead, attorney Terry Yates said Aguirre has Covid-19, and brought his test results to the court. Yates said Aguirre "wasn't doing well" when they spoke last night. The judge requested that they try again Friday and asked if Aguirre can appear via Zoom. Yates said they would try, but that Aguirre doesn't have a phone and he's not sure if he has a laptop. Aguirre was arrested Tuesday and is charged with aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, a second-degree felony punishable by up to 20 years in prison, prosecutors said. He posted $30,000 bond on Tuesday afternoon and is out of jail, according to Harris County court records.
Bond conditions were briefly discussed Thursday, but nothing was set since Aguirre wasn't present. Boston doctors warn that young people are dying at ‘historic rates’ from COVID-19
“What we believed before about the relative harmlessness of COVID-19 among younger adults has simply not been borne out by emerging data.” Boston doctors are warning in new research and in an op-ed in the New York Times that young people are dying at ‘historic rates’ from COVID-19. Dr. Rochelle Walensky, the chief of the division of infectious diseases at Massachusetts General Hospital who has been nominated by President-elect Joe Biden to serve as director of the CDC, and Dr. Jeremy Faust, an emergency room physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, authored the research with Dr. Harlan Krumholz, a professor of medicine at Yale. In their op-ed, published Wednesday, the physicians said they found that from March through the end of July, there were almost 12,000 more deaths than expected based on historical norms among adults between the ages of 25 and 44. Over the last 20 years, an average of 11,000 young Americans died each July, but during the pandemic that number surged to 16,000. “While detailed data are not yet available for all areas, we know COVID-19 is the driving force behind these excess deaths,” the doctors wrote in the Times. While the physicians said there is no doubt that the heaviest impact of the pandemic has landed on people above the age of 65, the age group that accounts for about 80 percent of U.S. deaths, “for too long,” they wrote, the message has been that the virus is dangerous just to older adults and that younger people “do well.” “What we believed before about the relative harmlessness of COVID-19 among younger adults has simply not been borne out by emerging data,” the doctors wrote. “In the past, it took us too long to respond to the epidemics of opioids and H.I.V./AIDS when the young started dying in large numbers. Now that we have similar information about COVID-19, we must immediately address it. We need to amend our messaging and our policies now. Outreach in the coming weeks and months is imperative. We know it can help.” Altering the approach and messaging is particularly important, they said, given that younger people are on the lower priority list for the COVID-19 vaccine rollout. “Modifying behavior now can save thousands of young lives next year,” they wrote. Unions for teachers, nurses, grocery and hotel workers call for L.A. County shutdown in January. Teacher Lisa Bennett, shown outside her Glendale home, supports a strict stay-at-home order to contain the coronavirus and allow her to return sooner to her classroom at Van Gogh Elementary in Granada Hills.(Kent Nishimura / Los Angeles Times). In a move that reflects the desperation of teachers, nurses, healthcare, grocery and hotel employees, their influential unions are calling for a strict month-long Los Angeles County shutdown in January to control the raging COVID-19 pandemic, save lives and ultimately allow for a quicker reopening of schools and the economy. Evidence of mounting frustration and anxiety has also emerged in newly released surveys of teachers and parents as most campuses across L.A. County remain closed to in-person classes. The union coalition called for what it described as a “circuit breaker” in a letter Wednesday night to the county Board of Supervisors and in an online petition. The letter demands stricter health orders, stronger enforcement and an infusion of aid from the state and federal government to keep workers and their employers afloat. Federal officials appear likely to approve an aid package, but there’s deep debate about whether it would go far enough. The proposed circuit breaker would resemble the near total shutdown in March and “would lower cases to relieve the pressure on hospitals and healthcare workers, allow state and local health agencies to strengthen the testing and tracing system, and allow the system to work better to prevent future surges in viral transmission,” according to the letter. It was signed by United Teachers Los Angeles, Unite Here Local 11, California Nurses Assn., United Food and Commercial Workers Local 770 and three other unions, several community groups and medical experts. When the county board meets Tuesday, this push will represent a political counter to pressure from businesses and allied groups that want to limit commercial restrictions. They’ve sued to overturn a ban on outdoor dining. A main organizer of the union initiative was the teachers union, which also represents nurses, counselors and librarians in Los Angeles Unified, the nation’s second-largest school system. ”Let’s be clear — we are not in a real lockdown,” said UTLA President Cecily Myart-Cruz. “While some people are able to stay home to work, the working-class and poor people of L.A. have to choose between risking their lives or putting food on the table for their families.” A shutdown must be accompanied by “a financial survival package for workers,” she said. “Without that, it’s clear that elected leaders expect workers to risk their lives in order to pay rent.” Until last week, L.A. Unified provided limited in-person services reaching less than 1% of students. A full campus shutdown began last week. Supt. Austin Beutner has not announced plans for January. Some union members quickly echoed the call by their leaders. Respiratory therapist Michael Rivera, who normally specializes in neonatal pediatrics, described a harrowing situation at Providence Cedars-Sinai Tarzana Medical Center. He’d just worked with a patient being moved into what he understood to be the hospital’s last available intensive-care-unit bed. “This dwarfs the L.A. riots,” said Rivera, a member of the National Union of Healthcare Workers, who used to work in South Los Angeles. “It doesn’t even move the needle compared to the carnage we’re seeing now.” Rivera was taking a 30-minute break in a shift he expected to last at least 12 hours. Within the last week, he worked a 24-hour shift. Less than 1% of ICU beds remain available across Southern California, according to state figures Wednesday. More than 60,000 healthcare workers have contracted the virus and 230 have died, according to state figures provided by the California Nurses Assn., which has 100,000 members in California and 50,000 outside the state. The letter from the union coalition, in essence, restates what the nurses association has long called for, said Stephanie A. Roberson, the union’s director of government relations. Hotel and restaurant workers have been hit hard both by the virus and job losses, said Kurt Petersen, co-president of Unite Here Local 11. About 90% of the union’s 30,000 members have lost their jobs in California and Arizona. And in October — when infection rates were lower — 20% of union members were testing positive for the virus, according to the union’s healthcare provider. Petersen said he hears of a member dying every week. Housekeeper Liliana Hernandez has managed to stay healthy so far, but she lost her job at a Santa Monica hotel in March. So did her husband, who buses tables at a restaurant. He returned to work in July, only to be laid off again the week before Thanksgiving. Previous government aid has allowed them to survive up till now. She sees the call for a circuit breaker — and the possibility of new aid — as a lifeline. “I’m very worried because colleagues from other places, worked one or two weeks got sick and passed away,” she said. “It’s going to be better if people stay home.” She’s also worried about her son, a senior at Bernstein High School in Hollywood, who is mired in distance learning. He struggles to stay focused and has trouble getting the help he needs. Their family’s experiences are mirrored in a just-released parent survey by the advocacy group Speak Up. In the survey, 70% of families reported problems keeping their children focused. Three in 10 families have difficulty paying for internet and close to half have inadequate service. More than half of parents reported that their children are grappling with mental health issues; nearly half reported students receiving lower grades. Speak Up asserts that schools should be open to the extent possible under county health rules and that distance learning needs to be improved for those families who don’t wish to return to campus. Teachers painted a similar picture of distance learning in a survey commissioned by Educators for Excellence-Los Angeles and USC Rossier School of Education. More than half of over 500 Los Angeles public school teachers said that the lack of access to high-speed internet presented a “very serious” challenge, increasing to two-thirds for those with students primarily from low-income households. And 94% of teachers reported low student engagement as a serious obstacle. Teachers also reported that their schools have failed to meet the needs of the most vulnerable students: 10% reported that their schools regularly met the needs of homeless students; 34% reported that their schools “often” support students from low-income households. Lisa Bennett, a 2019 teacher of the year honoree in L.A. Unified, is doing what she can as she works online with her class of students with disabilities, who would normally attend Van Gogh Elementary in Granada Hills. “I know that effective teaching happens best in a brick-and-mortar classroom,” said Bennett, who has underlying health conditions that would put her at high risk for COVID-19. One student was going to grandma’s to do schoolwork because her mother had to work, Bennett said. Then both the mother and grandmother were sick with COVID. She supports the circuit breaker and an aid package. “It’s a pandemic,” she said. “This has never been seen in our lifetime.” Devices Used In COVID-19 Treatment Can Give Errors For Patients With Dark Skin. A paramedic uses a pulse oximeter to check a patient's vital signs during an August home visit in the Bronx borough of New York. The common fingertip devices that measures oxygen in the blood can sometimes give misleading readings in people with dark skin, according to a report Wednesday in The New England Journal of Medicine. These devices, called pulse oximeters, are increasingly finding their way into people's homes, because of the COVID-19 pandemic. So, this is not just a concern for medical personnel using professional-grade devices. Dr. Michael Sjoding and colleagues at the University of Michigan hospital in Ann Arbor came across this issue this year when they received an influx of COVID-19 patients from Detroit's overflowing hospitals. Many of these patients are Black. Sjoding noticed something odd about results from the fingertip device used throughout hospitals. "It spits out this number called an oxygen saturation value, which gives us an understanding of how much oxygen is in the blood," Sjoding says. But he noticed that oxygen reading was sometimes off when compared with a more sophisticated test that samples blood from a person's artery. So Sjoding and his colleagues started gathering data, comparing these readings in light-skinned people versus dark-skinned people. They measured how often a pulse oximeter reading — apparently in the normal range — actually came from someone with low oxygen as measured in an artery. "We found this happened much more often in patients who were Black. Basically, about three times as often," he says. His initial study was based on more than 10,000 measurements taken at his hospital – instances in which doctors had nearly simultaneous oxygen readings from a pulse oximeter and blood in a person's artery. To validate that finding, he and his colleagues looked at another 37,000 measurements taken from 178 intensive care units. About 12% of the time, apparently normal readings were actually misleading, the report says. "It's not happening a lot, but if you think of how often these measurements are taken, if it's wrong 12% of the time, I worry that could be really impactful," Sjoding says. And, though previous studies have flagged this issue, Sjoding says he doesn't think it's widely appreciated by physicians in ICUs. "When I ran these analyses, I was just really surprised." It's all the more important now that many people are buying pulse oximeters to monitor their own health at home. He suspects the reason behind this is that the color of light used in the pulse oximeter can be absorbed by skin pigment. Dr. Jewel Mullen, associate dean for health equity at the University of Texas Dell Medical School in Austin, agrees that this discrepancy is about skin color, not race. She's concerned about the impact the finding could have on people who may rely on consumer-grade pulse oximeter devices at home, sometimes in lieu of medical care. The devices are still a valuable tool, she says, but it's important to look at the results in context. "If somebody has coronavirus and they're feeling really short of breath, but they're getting [an acceptable reading] — say an oxygen saturation of 92% to 96% or more — they should pay more attention to their shortness of breath, more than that oxygen that's being measured," Mullen says. People should also keep an eye on trends, rather than absolute readings, she says. If a person's oxygen level drops significantly, that should prompt a call to a medical provider, even if the number is still in the "normal" zone. Sjoding says pulse oximeters will remain important for hospitals as well, but he now thinks more carefully about how to interpret the readings.